
# Adaptation

We will continue our discussion on adaptation from the last lecture. We want to answer the question of what causes the sharp decrease (response) in activity $A$ due to an increase in ligand concentration $l$.

## Response Curve

The response curve plots the activity as a function of ligand concentration. In a system with adaptation the response curve will change as the ligand concentration in the environment changes. Can we describe the response function $A(l)$?

### Statistical Mechanics Approach

Let's consider a system of receptors at a fixed methylation level $m$.

A single receptor can be in one of four states characterized by being (un)bound and being (in)active. Let $a$ represent the activity of a receptor and $b$ represent its boundedness.

$$ \begin{align*}
\{ a = 0, \ b = 0 \} &\equiv \text{inactive and unbound} \\
\{ a = 1, \ b = 0 \} &\equiv \text{active and unbound} \\
\{ a = 0, \ b = 1 \} &\equiv \text{inactive and bound} \\
\{ a = 1, \ b = 1 \} &\equiv \text{active and bound}
\end{align*}$$

The reactions in our system look like the following

$$
\text{R}+\text{L} \rightleftharpoons^{k_+}_{k_-} \text{C} \ \ .
$$

$$ \begin{align*}
\text{R} &\equiv \text{concentration of unbound receptors} \\
\text{L} &\equiv \text{concentration of ligand} \\
\text{C} &\equiv \text{bound receptor-ligand complex}
\end{align*}$$

This yields the rate equation

$$ \dot{c} = k_+ rl - k_- c  \ \ .$$

Which has the steady-state solution

$$  0 = k_+ rl - k_- c  \ \ .$$

The concentration of receptors is assumed to be constant.

$$ c + r = 1/V  = \text{constant} \\ \Rightarrow k_- c = k_+ ( \tfrac{1}{V} - c)l$$

$$
cV = \frac{k_+ l}{k_+ l + k_-} = \frac{l}{l+K_i} \\ K_i \equiv \tfrac{k_-}{k_+} \\
\Rightarrow rV = \frac{K_i}{l+K_i}
$$

What are the probabilities $P_{ab}$ of the receptors being in the different states? 

$$
\frac{P_\text{bound}}{P_\text{unbound}} = \frac{P_{01}}{P_{00}}=\frac{c}{r} = \frac{l}{K_i}
$$

Through an analogous argument we can get the ratio of probabilities for the active case ($a=1$).

$$
\frac{P_{01}}{P_{00}} = \frac{l}{K_a}
$$

In order to relate the probabilities for active and inactive receptors let

$$ \frac{P_{10}}{P_{00}} = e^{f(m)} $$

describe the ratio between active and inactive states with and without ligand. The ratio is a function of the methylation level as indicated by the term $f(m)$.

These ratios along with the normalization condition gives us four equations with four unknown variables.

$$ \Rightarrow P_{00} = \left[ 1 + \frac{l}{K_i} + e^f \left( 1 + \frac{l}{K_a} \right) \right]^{-1}$$ 

We are interested in the *marginal probability distribution* $P_a$ which is the probability of being in an active state regardless of boundedness.

$$ P_a = \sum_b P_{ab} $$

$$
\text{let } \ \frac{P_{a=1}}{P_{a=0}} = \frac{P_{10}+P_{11}}{P_{00}+P_{01}} \equiv e^F\\
\Rightarrow F = F(m,l) = f(m) + \ln \left( \frac{1 + l/K_a}{1 + l/K_i} \right)
$$

Let's examine some limiting cases for $F$.

$$ \begin{align*}
l = 0 &: F(m,l) \to f(m) > 0 \\
l = \infty &: F(m,l) \to f(m) + \ln \left(\tfrac{K_i}{K_f} \right) \\
&\  \ \ F(m,l) < 0
\end{align*}$$

Unfortunately, this simple model of activty does not reproduce experimental results. Bacteria receptors are not this simple so the model breaks down. One hypothesis for a more realistic model is that receptors are coupled to one another.

### Monod, Wyman, Changeux (MWC) Model

In the MWC model receptors that are near one another can affect each other.

- Receptors are grouped into subclusters.
	- $N$ is the number of receptors in one subcluster.
- All receptors in one subcluster must have the same activity state.

$$ P_{A=0} + P_{A=1} = 1 $$

$$
\frac{P_{A=1}}{P_{A=0}} = e^{NF} \\
\Rightarrow P_{A=1} = \frac{e^{NF}}{1+e^{NF}} \ , \ \ P_{A=0} = \frac{1}{1+e^{NF}}
$$

We can measure the average activity.

$$
\bar{A} = \sum_{A=0}^1 A P_A = P_1 = \frac{e^{NF}}{1+e^{NF}} = \left( 1+e^{NF} \right)^{-1}
$$

$$
\text{recall, } \ F = f(m) + \ln \left( \frac{1 + l/K_a}{1 + l/K_i} \right) \\
\Rightarrow e^{NF} = \underbrace{e^{Nf(m)}}_{c(m)} \left( \frac{1 + l/K_a}{1 + l/K_i} \right)^N \\
\bar{A} = \frac{c (1+l/K_a)^N}{c(1+l/K_a)^N+(1+l/K_i)^N}
$$

As we have done before, let's examine the average activity in some limiting cases.

$$\begin{align*}
l>>K_a>>K_i \ &: \ \bar{A} \to \frac{c}{c+(K_a/K_i)^N} \xrightarrow{c<<(K_a/K_i)^N} 0 \\
l << K_i << K_a \ &: \ \bar{A} \to \frac{c}{c+1} \xrightarrow{c>>1} 1
\end{align*}$$

Notice that the term $c$ is a function of the methylation levels, and so the methylation level changes the mean activation behavior. $\{K_a,K_i\}$ sets the range of $l$ for the response in activity can vary from 0 to 1.

$$
\frac{d\bar{A}}{dl} = - \left[1+e^{-NF}\right]^{-2}(-N)e^{-NF}\frac{dF}{dl} \\
\Rightarrow \frac{d\bar{A}}{dl} = -N\bar{A}(1-\bar{A})\frac{ K_a-K_i}{(l+K_a)(l+K_i)}
$$

So the change in the mean activity depends on cooperativity through the number of receptors per subcluster. The term $\bar{A}(1-\bar{A})$ is maximized at $\bar{A} = \tfrac{1}{2}$, and $K_a>>K_i$ maximizes the last term in the derivative. Therefore at those parameter regimes the activity is very sensitive to changes in the ligand concentration.

> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).