---
layout: post
title: Lecture 15
---

# Gene Activation

In the previous lecture we discussed a simple model of protein production with an activator.

$$ \text{X}+\text{D} \rightleftharpoons^{k_+}_{k_-} \text{C} \xrightarrow{k}\text{Y}+\text{X}+\text{D} $$

Now lets consider a more involved model.

## Additional Considerations

### **X** has its own dynamics

$$
\text{D} \xrightarrow{g}\text{D}+\text{X} \\
\text{X} \xrightarrow{s}\emptyset
$$

We can write down a rate equation describing the dynamics.

$$ \dot{x} = \frac{g}{V}-sx $$

In steady state, the concentration of X is constant.

$$ x_\text{ss}=\frac{g}{sV} \\ \therefore \ y_\text{ss}=\frac{f_+(x_\text{ss})}{r} $$

### Transcription Factors

Transcription factors (in this case it is **X**) often [oligomerize](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oligomer) before binding to DNA. Therefore the dynamics must be modified in order to take this into account.

$$
\underbrace{X+X+X+... +X}_h \rightleftharpoons^{k'_+}_{k'_-} X' \\
X'+\text{D} \rightleftharpoons^{k_+}_{k_-} \text{C} \xrightarrow{k}\text{Y}+X'+\text{D} \\
$$

So the rate equation needs to take into account the many X oligomerize and then bind to DNA.

$$ \dot{x}'=k'_+x^h-k'_-x' $$

Oligomerization is faster than transcription/translation. So we can safely assume

$$
\dot{x}'\approx0  \\ \Rightarrow x'=\frac{k'_+}{k'_-}x^h\sim x^h \\
\Rightarrow f_+(x) \to \frac{k}{V}\frac{x^h}{x^h+K_d^h}
$$

The above function is known as a [Hill function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hill_equation_(biochemistry)). The function sharpens as $$h$$ increases. Note the following limiting case:

$$ x<<K_d \ \rightarrow \ f_+(x)\approx\frac{k}{V}\frac{x^h}{K_d^h}$$

- Oligomerization (also referred to as cooperativity) acts to sharpen gene regulation functions.
- However, when comparing with experiments our model does **not** agree exactly with experimental results.
	- Experiments show that biological systems are very noisy.
- Theoretically there are two possible explanations in regards to gene expression to account for the noise seen in biological systems.
1. X is noisy only, and that noise propagates to Y.
2. X is noisy and Y is also noisy on its own.
	- Turns out that statement 2 is correct.

# Noise

We will describe the noise in Y as having two contributions. One due to the *intrinsic* noisiness of Y and the other due to the propagation of noise from X (*extrinsic noise*).

$$ \sigma_y^2 = \sigma_\text{int}^2+\sigma_\text{ext}^2 $$

The noise from X is denoted with subscript "*ext*" for extrinsic noise. The noise due to Y itself is labelled "*int*" for intrinsic noise.

## Intrinsic Noise

Lets first consider only intrinsic noise without the presence of X.

$$ \text{D} \xrightarrow{k}\text{D}+\text{Y} \\ \text{Y} \xrightarrow{r}\emptyset $$

We already wrote down the simple rate equation for this model in the [previous lecture](http://varennes.github.io/lecture14/). Instead of thinking in terms of rate equations lets now look at this in terms of probabilities. Let $$n$$ denote the number of Y proteins in the cell. Lets formulate the probabilities of going to state with one more or one less Y protein.

### Transition Probabilities and Master Equation

$$
p(n\to n+1 \text{ in }\Delta t)=p_{n+1}=k\Delta t \\
p(n\to n-1 \text{ in }\Delta t)=p_{n-1}=k\Delta t
$$

Then the **master equation** is the following:

$$ \begin{align*}
\dot{p_0}&=p_1r-p_0k \\
\dot{p_n}&=p_{n-1}+p_{n+1}r(n+1)-p_nk-p_nrn
\end{align*}$$

In stationary state all time derivatives are equal to zero.
For n = 0 :

$$ 0 = p_1r-p_0k \\ \Rightarrow p_1=\frac{k}{r}p_0=\lambda p_0  \\ \lambda \equiv \frac{k}{r} $$

For n = 1 :

$$ 0 = p_{0}+p_{2}r(n+1)-p_1k-p_1r \\ \Rightarrow p_2 = \frac{\lambda^2}{2}p_0 $$

A pattern emerges (take my word for it)...

$$ p_n = \frac{\lambda^n}{n!}p_0 $$

This is a [Poisson distribution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poisson_distribution)! We can normalize our distribution in order to solve for $$p_0$$ which yields:

$$ p_n = e^{-\lambda}\frac{\lambda^n}{n!} $$

Like any Poisson distribution the mean and variance are

$$ \bar{n}=\lambda, \ \ \ \sigma^2=\lambda. $$

We now have an expression for the intrinsic noise!

$$ \sigma^2_\text{int}=\bar{n}=\lambda=\frac{k}{r} $$

### Relative Noise

Relative noise is the ratio of the noise to the mean number squared.

$$ \eta^2 \equiv \frac{\sigma^2}{\bar{n}^2} \\ \therefore \eta_\text{int}=\frac{1}{\sqrt{\bar{n}}}$$

So the relative intrinsic noise decreases as the average number of proteins increases.

> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).
