
# Autoregulation (continued)

Can we say something quantitative about...

1. Noise reduction for autorepression.
2. Switching time for auto-activation.

Last lecture we came up with an expression for the steady-state probability distribution for an autoregulating protein, but the expression was unwieldy.

$$
p_n = \frac{p_0}{n!r^n} \prod_{j=0}^{n-1}f_j \\
\dot{p}_n = f_{n-1}p_{n-1}+r(n+1)p_{n+1}-f_np_n-rnp_n
$$

In this class we will use the *linear noise approximation* (LNA) to get a nicer form.

## Linear Noise Approximation

The LNA requires the following:

1. Molecule number is large, $n>>1$.
2. Noise is small, $\eta<<\bar{n}$

$$ \eta = \text{ fluctuating variable with zero mean} \\ n = \bar{n}+\eta $$

$$ \text{Let } \ g(n)\equiv f_np_n \ , \ \ h(n)\equiv rnp_n $$

We will treat these functions as being functions as continuous variables since for large molecule number, a change of $\pm 1$ is small and approximately continuous. So we can do a Taylor series expansion about $\pm 1$.

$$\begin{align}
g(n-1) &\approx g(n)-(1)g'(n)+\frac{1}{2}(1)^2g''(n) \\
h(n+1) &\approx h(n) + (1)h'(n)+\frac{1}{2}(1)^2h''(n)
\end{align}$$

After some algebra this leads to the following expression for the probability time derivatives.

$$
\Rightarrow \dot{p}(n) = -\partial_n \left\{ \left[ f(n)-rn \right] \right\}
  + \frac{1}{2} \partial_n^2 \left\{ \left[ f(n)+rn \right] \right\} \\
F(n) \equiv f(n)-rn \\
\Delta (n) \equiv f(n)+rn
$$

$$ \dot{p} = -(pF)' + \frac{1}{2}(p\Delta)'' $$

The is the [Fokker-Planck equation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fokker%E2%80%93Planck_equation). The first term on the right-side of the equation represents *drift* in the probability density whereas the second term represents *diffusion*. We can further simplify the equality i the following way:

$$
\text{let } j(n) \equiv p(n)F(n)-\frac{1}{2} \partial_n \left[p(n)\Delta(n) \right] \\
\Rightarrow \dot{p}(n)=-\partial_nj(n)
$$

We know that in steady-state the time derivative of the probability function equals zero.

$$
 \dot{p}(n)= 0 = -\partial_nj(n) \\ \Rightarrow j(n) = \text{constant}
 $$

Now lets figure out what that constant is. We know that for our probability distribution to normalizable then it must go to zero as the number of molecules approaches infinity.

$$ p(n\to\infty)=0 \ \ \text{and} \ \ p'(n\to\infty)=0 \\ \therefore j(n\to\infty)=0$$

Since $j$ is a constant then it must equal zero not just out at infinity, but for all values of $n$.

$$ j = 0 $$

$$
\Rightarrow 0 = p(n)F(n)-\frac{1}{2} \partial_n \left[p(n)\Delta(n) \right]\\
p(n)F(n) = \frac{1}{2} \partial_n \left[p(n)\Delta(n) \right]
$$

Now lets use the second approximation we stated at the very beginning, that noise is small. In order to use this approximation we will perform a change of variables so that our function are expressed in terms of $\eta$ instead of $n$.

$$ \frac{\partial n}{\partial \eta} = 1 \ \Rightarrow \ \frac{d}{dn}=\frac{d}{d\eta} $$

For probability to be conserved the following must be true: 

$$ p(n)dn = p(\eta)d\eta \\ \Rightarrow p(n) = p(\eta) $$

We can do a series expansion since $\eta$ is small.

$$
F(n) = F(\bar{n}+\eta)=F(\bar{n})+\eta F'(\bar{n})+\frac{1}{2}\eta^2F''(\bar{n}) + ...\\
\text{Note } F(\bar{n})=0 \\
\text{let } \eta \bar{F}' \equiv \eta F'(\bar{n})
$$

Ignoring terms in our expansion of order $\eta^2$ or higher gives the following:

$$ F(n) \approx \eta \bar{F}' $$

We can do the same sort of thing for $\Delta(n)$.

$$
\Delta(n) = \Delta(\bar{n}+\eta)= \Delta(\bar{n})+\eta\Delta'(n)+... \\
\Delta(n) \approx \Delta(\bar{n}) \equiv \bar{\Delta}
$$

$$
\therefore \eta p(\eta)\bar{F}' = \frac{1}{2} \partial_\eta \left[p(\eta)\bar{\Delta}(n) \right] \\
\eta p \bar{F}' = \frac{1}{2} \frac{\partial p}{\partial \eta} \bar{\Delta}
$$

If you want to take my word for it, the solution of $p(\eta)$ should look something like...

$$ p = Ae^{-\eta/2\sigma^2} $$

And after doing some math we can the follwoing relationship:

$$ \sigma^2 = \frac{\bar{\Delta}}{(-2\bar{F}')} $$

The denominator is a positive quantity since $\bar{F}'$ is negative.

Now let's solve for the variance.

$$ \text{Recall } f(n)=k\frac{n_0^h}{n_0^h+n^h} \ , \text{ and let } n_0\approx \bar{n}\ .$$

$$
\therefore \bar{\Delta} = \Delta(\bar{n})=f(\bar{n})+r\bar{n} \\
\bar{\Delta}=\frac{k}{2}+rn_0 \\
\therefore \bar{F}'=f'(\bar{n})-r \\
f'(n_0) = -\frac{kh}{4n_0} \\
\Rightarrow \sigma^2 = \frac{k/2 + rn_0}{ \frac{kh}{2n_0}+2r}
$$

## Switching times in a Bi-stable System

The probability distribution of a bi-stable system always has two local maximums indicating separate locations of stability in the system. Let *A* represent the location of the first local maximum and *B* represent the location of the second local maximum. We also want to define the local minimum in the probability distribution betwenn *A* and *B* and we will designate that minimum as *C*.

Let's seperate the probability distribution into the parts. One part is the probability of being below point *C* (associated with stable point *A*) and the other is the probability of being above point *C* (associated with stable point *B*).

$$ \Pi_A = \sum_{n=0}^{n_c} p_n \\ \Pi_B = \sum_{n=n_c+1}^\infty p_n $$

The average time spent in each respective bi-stable region is proportional to its probability distribution.

$$ \Rightarrow \frac{\tau_A}{\tau_B} = \frac{\Pi_A}{\Pi_B} $$

From *Kramer's escape rate* we can relate the rate system switching from *A* or from *B* to the energies associated with being in those states.

$$ p \cdot \Delta \sim e^{-\beta U} $$

Let's assume that the system starts a point *A*. Calculate the escape rate to the other stable point, *B*.

$$ r_{A\to B}  = \frac{De^{\beta(U_C-U_A)}}{ \sqrt{\beta | U''_A |} \sqrt{\beta | U''_C |} } = \frac{1}{\tau_A} \\
r_{B\to A}  = \frac{De^{\beta(U_C-U_B)}}{ \sqrt{\beta | U''_B |} \sqrt{\beta | U''_C |} } = \frac{1}{\tau_B} \\
\frac{\tau_A}{\tau_B} = \frac{  \sqrt{\beta | U''_A |} }{ \sqrt{\beta | U''_B |}}\frac{e^{-\beta U_A}}{e^{-\beta U_B}}
$$

Let's calculate $\beta | U'' |$ using Kramer's escape rate.

$$\begin{align}
\beta U &= -\ln (p\cdot\Delta ) \\ \beta U' &= \frac{p'}{p} \\
|\beta U''| &= \left[ \frac{pp''-(p')^2}{p^2} \right] \\
|\beta U''_{A,B} &= \left. \frac{p''}{p}\right|_{A,B}
\end{align} \\
\therefore \frac{\tau_A}{\tau_B} = 
\underbrace{ \frac{\Delta_A \cdot p_A}{\Delta_B \cdot p_B}\frac{\sqrt{p''_A/p_A}}{\sqrt{p''_B/p_B}} }_\text{
Kramer's Approximation}
$$



> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).